Impact on Security Operations (#107)
IETF-OPSAWG-WG/draft-opsarea-rfc5706bis: draft-opsarea-rfc5706bis.md

   changes, where they are required, and how they can be introduced in
   a manner that facilitates deployment.

   Incentivizing good security operation practices when migrating to New Protocol should be encouraged. For example, patching is fundamental for security operations and can be incentivised if Protocol Designers consider supporting cheap and fast connection handoffs and reconnections. 

>    When Protocol Designers are considering how deployments should transition to New Protocol, impacts to current techniques employed by operators should be documented and mitigations included, where possible, so that consistent security operations and management can be achieved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   When Protocol Designers are considering how deployments should transition to the New Protocol or Protocol Extension, impacts to current techniques employed by operators should be documented and mitigations included, where possible, so that consistent security operations and management can be achieved.
```

   possible to generate the operations necessary to get from A to B with
   minimal state changes and effects on network and systems.

## Impact on Security Operations {#sec-impact-secops}

   As well as outlining the impacts on the operations of existing Networks, Protocol Designers should consider the impacts of a New Protocol or Protocol Extension on Security Operations (SecOps) in networks that the protocol will be deployed in. Security operators detect malicious activity and respond to threats and are a crucial part of defending networks from attacks. 

   The discovery of Indicators of Compromise (IoCs) {{?RFC9424}} is relied upon by security operators to identify and block malicious activity. A New Protocol or Protocol Extension may have implications for the types, locations or availability of IoCs and Protocol Designers should outline such impacts. Similarly, to be most effective, IoCs are required to be shared at scale so consideration should be given to ensure this is possible. 

>    The protocol specification should consider any impact to the ability of attackers to perform malicious activities, such as Command and Control (C2) communications, network traversal or facilitation of exfiltration of data from the network. A New Protocol may offer different opportunities for performing such malicious activity or could prevent current techniques, and this should be captured. 

Author: I appreciate the review and collaboration! I can update the text later this week.

   possible to generate the operations necessary to get from A to B with
   minimal state changes and effects on network and systems.

## Impact on Security Operations {#sec-impact-secops}

>    Security Operations (SecOps) is a collaborative approach that combines security and operational teams improve the ability of operators to protect and manage the network effectively and efficiently{{SECOPS}}. Security operators detect malicious activity and respond to threats and are a crucial part of defending against attacks alongside the management and operation of the network.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Security Operations (SecOps) is a collaborative approach that combines security and operational teams to improve the ability of operators to protect and manage the network effectively and efficiently{{SECOPS}}. Security operators detect malicious activity and respond to threats and are a crucial part of defending against attacks alongside the management and operation of the network.  
```

>    Protocol Designers should consider the impacts of a New Protocol or Protocol Extension on Security Operations (SecOps) in networks that the protocol will be deployed in. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Protocol Designers should consider the impacts of a New Protocol or Protocol Extension on Security Operations in networks that the protocol will be deployed in. 
```

>    Security operators extensively rely upon Indicators of Compromise (IoCs) {{?RFC9424}}. The deployment of New Protocol or Protocol Extension may change the type, locations or availability of IoCs and Protocol Designers should outline such changes to ensure operators can manage and defend their network consistently.    

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Security operators extensively rely upon Indicators of Compromise (IoCs) {{?RFC9424}}. The deployment of New Protocol or Protocol Extension may change the type, locations, or availability of IoCs. Protocol Designers should outline such changes to ensure operators can manage and defend their network consistently.    
```

>    For example, consider the operators' requirement for digital forensics from the network or endpoints with vital sources of this information found in logs. The requirement for providing protocol-specific logging formats, logging events schema and guidance for operators should be considered when designing a New Protocol to ensure that operators have the information they need. {{?I-D.ietf-quic-qlog-main-schema}} is an example of extensible structured logging for network protocols, which has been extended as new protocols have been designed in IETF.      

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider the operators' requirement for digital forensics from the network or endpoints with critical information found in logs. Logging events schema and guidance for operators should be considered when designing a New Protocol or Protocol Extension to ensure that operators have the information they need. {{?I-D.ietf-quic-qlog-main-schema}} is an example of extensible structured logging.
```

>    Similarly, tooling required by security operators should be considered in the design and deployment of a New Protocol. Operators may require new tooling or methods for managing network traffic in response to protocol changes to ensure consistent availability and performance of networks. Similarly, updating and augmenting existing forensic tools such as protocol dissectors is expected when a New Protocol is deployed, but having to completely rebuild such tooling would greatly reduce the effectiveness of security operators, so protocol extensibility should be considered. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tooling required by security operators should be documented in the design and deployment of a New Protocol or Protocol Extension. Operators may require new tooling or methods for managing network traffic in response to protocol changes to ensure consistent availability and performance of networks. Similarly, updating and augmenting existing forensic tools such as protocol dissectors is expected when a New Protocol is deployed, but having to completely rebuild such tooling would greatly reduce the effectiveness of security operators, so protocol extensibility should be considered. 
```

>    Incentivizing good security operational practices should be considered in the design of New Protocol or Protocol Extension. For example, patching is fundamental for security operations and can be incentivised if Protocol Designers consider supporting cheap and fast connection handoffs and reconnections. 

Reviewer 2: CANDIDATE FOR REMOVAL. How does it fit with the section 4.3 Migration Path.
Is there a sentence or two you want to add to 4.3, stressing the need for security operations?

Author: I have applied these changes

>    If protocols are being updated or replaced, consideration should be given to the current techniques employed by operators of the deployed protocol and corresponding infrastructure to provide operational security. Specifications should ensure that mitigations are included, where possible, so that consistent security operations and management can be achieved.

Reviewer 2: CANDIDATE FOR REMOVAL. How does it fit with the section 4.3 Migration Path.
Is there a sentence or two you want to add to 4.3, stressing the need for security operations?

Reviewer 2: Michael, your new text is fine. Feel free to apply the changes.

   possible to generate the operations necessary to get from A to B with
   minimal state changes and effects on network and systems.

## Impact on Security Operations {#sec-impact-secops}

   Security Operations (SecOps) is a collaborative approach that combines security and operational teams to protect networks and digital assets {{SECOPS}}. Historically, these functions were performed separately, with siloed teams having different priorities. SecOps combines these roles to improve the ability of operators to protect and manage the network effectively and efficiently. Security operators detect malicious activity and respond to threats and are a crucial part of defending against attacks alongside the management and operation of the network.  

   Protocol Designers should consider the impacts of a New Protocol or Protocol Extension on Security Operations (SecOps) in networks that the protocol will be deployed in. 

>    Indicators of Compromise (IoCs) {{?RFC9424}} are relied upon by security operators to identify and block malicious activity. A New Protocol or Protocol Extension may have implications for the types, locations or availability of IoCs and Protocol Designers should outline such impacts. Similarly, to be most effective, IoCs are required to be shared at scale so consideration should be given to ensure this is possible. 

Reviewer: Maybe an example of implications and what "at scale" in this case means would be helpful.

   As in {{sec-impact}}, Protocol Designers should also consider the impact of traffic levels and traffic patterns from a security perspective, for example, factoring in the ability to defend against malicious distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks. Protocol Designers should also consider whether New Protocol could be used to create DDoS attacks, for example amplication attacks in DNS or NTP. Operators may require new tooling or methods for managing network traffic in response to a change in potential risk to ensure consistent availability and performance of the network. 

   Many security operation tools are automated to detect threats, and implications of New Protocols and Protocol Extensions for such tooling should be captured, for example aiming to minimise the likelihood of false positives which can lead to operators to be desensitised to alerts when deploying a New Protocol.

>    In order to reduce the effects of compromise, security operators may also require digital forensics from the network or endpoints to enable effective incident response or threat hunting. Key sources of this information may be found in logs which could provide details of authentication or authorization events, network traffic or endpoint-detection events, for example. In particular, where a New Protocol changes the properties or topology of the network, Protocol Designers should consider the requirement for digital forensics and whether logs for the network, endpoints or any new intermediaries introduced are impacted positively or negatively. {{?I-D.ietf-quic-qlog-main-schema}} is an example of structured logging for network protocols, and new ways of providing logging should be considered when designing a New Protocol.  

Reviewer: I don't disagree with this, but it's kind of abstract in what it's recommending.  What specific "new ways" of providing logs should designers consider?

   As above, any impact on forensic tooling should be considered. Updating and augmenting existing forensic tools such as protocol dissectors is expected when a New Protocol is deployed, but having to completely rebuild such tooling would greatly reduce the effectiveness of security operators.

   Protocol Designers will often consider building in flexibility for future versions and extensions from the outset so that code can easily be written to handle, identify and differentiate between versions. This practice will also be beneficial for security operators so should be considered. 

>    Incentivising good security operational practices should be considered in the design of New Protocol or Protocol Extension. For example, enabling patching is fundamental for security operations and should be incentivised so Protocol Designers should consider supporting cheap and fast connection handoffs and reconnections. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Incentivizing good security operational practices should be considered in the design of New Protocol or Protocol Extension. For example, patching is fundamental for security operations and can be incentivised if Protocol Designers consider supporting cheap and fast connection handoffs and reconnections. 
```
